now we return to the tensions
between
Saudi Arabia and Iran I'm joined
by
volleying Nasr dean of the Johns
Hopkins
School of Advanced International
Studies
and Rhonda sleeve of the Middle
East
Institute and we welcome you
both want
to seem to you first why did the
saudi
execute this cleric whom they
had
imprisoned already for several
years
this is a crisis that need to be
looked
at in the context of an ongoing
rivalry
for power between Saudi Arabia
and Iran
and this execution is a message
from the
saudis to Iran but also it's a
message
to its own domestic constituency
but I
think the crisis that has been
you know
caused by this execution is
primarily
driven by domestic factors we
have two
teams in this case in Saudi
Arabia and
Iran that they are acting out of
fear
and out of feelings of
insecurity about
the long-term stability of the
regime
and they are using this crisis
as a way
to consolidate power and support
internally and to send messages
or so
regionally so Vali Nasr the
saudis had
to know that this would inflame
and
anger Iran yes they did and this
came
after another crisis which
followed a
kid the death of several hundred
Iranian
pilgrims during a tragedy in
Mecca last
year the relations got very
tense both
sides accuse one another of bad
intentions and Iran had also
warned
about the killing of this this
cleric
and so had the united states and
the
killing of a cleric particularly
Shiite
Islam is not a trifle too
trivial matter
and the saudis knew that this is
killing
a Shiite clerics is not killing
like
killing any other Shiite
activists and i
think is absolutely correct that
there
was domestic factor this
execution came
two days after the saudis
announce their
first austerity package
internally as a
consequence of production of oil
prices
it also came regionally right
after the
United States first included
running the Vienna process and
then they
shared government in Iraq with
American
and Iranian support recaptured
Ramadi it
looked like Iranians are
actually on a
on a much more of an upswing in
the
region than than than the saudis
were so
it's also a signal in addition
to the
domestic policy the signal to
the United
States as well
fair to say there's more
animosity on
the part of the saudis toward
Iran than
the other way around I think
look the
Iranian threat has all been
private era
prioritized by the Saudi
political
establishment and untie Iran
feelings
anti-shock feelings are also
prevalent
among large segments of the
Saudi
population but I agree with my
friend
Valley but there is also on the
Iranian
side there are certain
hardliners inside
the Iranian regime that have
approved of
the attacks against the Saudi
embassy
and the Saudi consulate and
these are
the members of the Iraqi regime
that are
feeling very concerned cared
about the
consequences of the iran deal
about Iran
opening to the outside world and
how
this is going to affect their
own hold
on political and economic power
and they
are using this this crisis as as
a way
to wrap up support and
consolidate that
camp ahead of the upcoming
elections in
Iran in February so you're so
violates
some elements in iran using this
to
bolster their own case against
normalizing or even coming close
to
normal
rising relations with the west
might
agree with it would run
there is at action in Iran which
is not
happy with the nuclear deal is
not happy
with a change of Iran status in
the
global affairs and also wants to
defeat
President Rohani on and and and
his
moderates in the upcoming
elections and
I think the side the saudi
action is
much like when republicans in
congress
posture with new sanctions
against Iran
the conservatives immediately
take
advantage of it in order to
muddy the
water embarrass the president
and try to
prove that opening to the west
has
actually been a mistake and that
Iran
would do a lot better by taking
a hard
line position having settled its
Rhonda
slim what are the consequences
and we
know there's the war in Syria
there is
the Indian nuclear deal with
iran and
aus what happens to that nuclear
deal
going forward
look this is happening at the
time when
tensions specialist sectarian
tensions
in the region that they are
already at
it high pitch so it's like
pouring
gasoline on a fire and the
fallout for
example in terms of the
implications for
the negotiations in Syria or the
UN
sponsored negotiations that were
to be
launched at the end of this
month in
Syria as well as un attempts to
establish a permanent cease-fire
in
Yemen I think we can we can
further you
know we can say that these
efforts are
have now been dealt a very
severe blow
they are on life support and I
don't
know whether the upcoming
negotiations
in Syria will take place now
neither
Saudi Arabia note Iran are
incentivized
to make concessions to pressure
their
Syrian proxies to make the
session but
then there is also a broader
regional
fallout I'm very concerned about
whether
Bahrain will follow Saudi Arabia
Sudan
to ramp up its security approach
in its
into dealing with its own Shiite
opposition the fallout with the
security
in Lebanon Lebanon where if Iran
or
Saudi Arabia tries to pressure
their
respective proxies in Lebanon to
take
sides how this will impact
already high
regional sectarian tension and
violence
or how do you see the
repercussions
going forward well i i agree
with
everything that Rhonda said
but also it's important to note
that the
united states and its
international
allies have their own interest
in the
region which is fighting I says
ending
the war in Syria making the
Iranian
nuclear deal successful it's
very clear
that the hard-liners in Iran and
Saudi
regime have a different agenda
here and
and sectarianism serves at the
agenda
Saudi Arabia did not want Iran
to be
included in the regional process
sees it
does not want Iran to be
normalize
relations with the west from the
very
early on he rejected the nuclear
deal
and he tied the nuclear deal to
regional
issues and also saudi arabia is
much
more interested in seeing the
problem in
the Middle East is iran not Isis
well as
for the west is now Isis going
forward
in 2016 if the united states
wants to
get ahead of the ISIS issue if
it wants
to find a way to end the war in
Syria
which I'm I agree with you on
that is
not very difficult to see how
they've
been a process that will get us
there it
has to be it has to essentially
be very
clear about what it expects of
both
sides in terms of cooperation
serious
repercussions everywhere you
look
filing officer Rhonda slim we
thank you
both